# 11. Operator Overloading

In C++, operators are implemented as functions. By using function overloading on the operator functions, you can define your own versions of the operators that work with different data types (including classes that you’ve written). Using function overloading to overload operators is called **operator overloading**.

When evaluating an expression containing an operator, the compiler uses the following rules:

- If *all* of the operands are fundamental data types, the compiler will call a built-in routine if one exists. If one does not exist, the compiler will produce a compiler error.
- If *any* of the operands are user data types (e.g. one of your classes, or an enum type), the compiler looks to see whether the type has a matching overloaded operator function that it can call. If it can’t find one, it will try to convert one or more of the user-defined type operands into fundamental data types so it can use a matching built-in operator (via an overloaded typecast, which we’ll cover later in this chapter). If that fails, then it will produce a compile error.

**What are the limitations on operator overloading?**

First, almost any existing operator in C++ can be overloaded. The exceptions are: conditional (?:), sizeof, scope (::), member selector (.), member pointer selector (.*), typeid, and the casting operators.

Second, you can only overload the operators that exist. You can not create new operators or rename existing operators. For example, you could not create an operator ** to do exponents.

Third, at least one of the operands in an overloaded operator must be a user-defined type. This means you can not overload the plus operator to work with one integer and one double. However, you could overload the plus operator to work with an integer and a Mystring.

Fourth, it is not possible to change the number of operands an operator supports.

Finally, all operators keep their default precedence and associativity (regardless of what they’re used for) and this can not be changed.

**Best practice:** When overloading operators, it’s best to keep the function of the operators as close to the original intent of the operators as possible.

**Best practice**: If the meaning of an overloaded operator is not clear and intuitive, use a named function instead.

Within those confines, you will still find plenty of useful functionality to overload for your custom classes! You can overload the + operator to concatenate your user-defined string class, or add two Fraction class objects together. You can overload the << operator to make it easy to print your class to the screen (or a file). You can overload the equality operator (==) to compare two class objects. This makes operator overloading one of the most useful features in C++ -- simply because it allows you to work with your classes in a more intuitive way.

## Arithmetic Operators

Note that all of the arithmetic operators are binary operators -- meaning they take two operands -- one on each side of the operator. All four of these operators are overloaded in the exact same way.


Some of the most commonly used operators in C++ are the arithmetic operators -- that is, the plus operator (+), minus operator (-), multiplication operator (*), and division operator (/). Note that all of the arithmetic operators are binary operators -- meaning they take two operands -- one on each side of the operator. All four of these operators are overloaded in the exact same way.

It turns out that there are three different ways to overload operators: the member function way, the friend function way, and the normal function way.

### Friend Function Way

Example

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Cents
{
private:
	int m_cents {};

public:
	Cents(int cents) : m_cents{ cents } { }

	// add Cents + Cents using a friend function
	friend Cents operator+(const Cents& c1, const Cents& c2);

	int getCents() const { return m_cents; }
};

// note: this function is not a member function!
Cents operator+(const Cents& c1, const Cents& c2)
{
	// use the Cents constructor and operator+(int, int)
	// we can access m_cents directly because this is a friend function
	return Cents{c1.m_cents + c2.m_cents};
}

int main()
{
	Cents cents1{ 6 };
	Cents cents2{ 8 };
	Cents centsSum{ cents1 + cents2 };
	std::cout << "I have " << centsSum.getCents() << " cents.\n";

	return 0;
}
```

Overloading the plus operator (+) is as simple as declaring a function named operator+, giving it two parameters of the type of the operands we want to add, picking an appropriate return type, and then writing the function.

In the case of our Cents object, implementing our operator+() function is very simple. First, the parameter types: in this version of operator+, we are going to add two Cents objects together, so our function will take two objects of type Cents. Second, the return type: our operator+ is going to return a result of type Cents, so that’s our return type.

Finally, implementation: to add two Cents objects together, we really need to add the m_cents member from each Cents object. Because our overloaded operator+() function is a friend of the class, we can access the m_cents member of our parameters directly. Also, because m_cents is an integer, and C++ knows how to add integers together using the built-in version of the plus operator that works with integer operands, we can simply use the + operator to do the adding.

Often it is the case that you want your overloaded operators to work with **operands that are different types**. For example, if we have Cents(4), we may want to add the integer 6 to this to produce the result Cents(10).

For example, `Cents(4) + 6` would call operator+(Cents, int), and `6 + Cents(4)` would call operator+(int, Cents). Consequently, whenever we overload binary operators for operands of different types, we actually need to write two functions -- one for each case. Here is an example of that:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Cents
{
private:
	int m_cents {};

public:
	Cents(int cents) : m_cents{ cents } { }

	// add Cents + int using a friend function
	friend Cents operator+(const Cents& c1, int value);

	// add int + Cents using a friend function
	friend Cents operator+(int value, const Cents& c1);


	int getCents() const { return m_cents; }
};

// note: this function is not a member function!
Cents operator+(const Cents& c1, int value)
{
	// use the Cents constructor and operator+(int, int)
	// we can access m_cents directly because this is a friend function
	return { c1.m_cents + value };
}

// note: this function is not a member function!
Cents operator+(int value, const Cents& c1)
{
	// use the Cents constructor and operator+(int, int)
	// we can access m_cents directly because this is a friend function
	return { c1.m_cents + value };
}

int main()
{
	Cents c1{ Cents{ 4 } + 6 };
	Cents c2{ 6 + Cents{ 4 } };

	std::cout << "I have " << c1.getCents() << " cents.\n";
	std::cout << "I have " << c2.getCents() << " cents.\n";

	return 0;
}
```

Another example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class MinMax
{
private:
	int m_min {}; // The min value seen so far
	int m_max {}; // The max value seen so far

public:
	MinMax(int min, int max)
		: m_min { min }, m_max { max }
	{ }

	int getMin() const { return m_min; }
	int getMax() const { return m_max; }

	friend MinMax operator+(const MinMax& m1, const MinMax& m2);
	friend MinMax operator+(const MinMax& m, int value);
	friend MinMax operator+(int value, const MinMax& m);
};

MinMax operator+(const MinMax& m1, const MinMax& m2)
{
	// Get the minimum value seen in m1 and m2Fr
	int min{ m1.m_min < m2.m_min ? m1.m_min : m2.m_min };

	// Get the maximum value seen in m1 and m2
	int max{ m1.m_max > m2.m_max ? m1.m_max : m2.m_max };

	return { min, max };
}

MinMax operator+(const MinMax& m, int value)
{
	// Get the minimum value seen in m and value
	int min{ m.m_min < value ? m.m_min : value };

	// Get the maximum value seen in m and value
	int max{ m.m_max > value ? m.m_max : value };

	return { min, max };
}

MinMax operator+(int value, const MinMax& m)
{
	// call operator+(MinMax, int)
	return { m + value };
}

int main()
{
	MinMax m1{ 10, 15 };
	MinMax m2{ 8, 11 };
	MinMax m3{ 3, 12 };

	MinMax mFinal{ m1 + m2 + 5 + 8 + m3 + 16 };

	std::cout << "Result: (" << mFinal.getMin() << ", " <<
		mFinal.getMax() << ")\n";

	return 0;
}
```

About how “MinMax mFinal { m1 + m2 + 5 + 8 + m3 + 16 }” evaluates. Remember that operator+ evaluates from left to right, so m1 + m2 evaluates first. This becomes a call to operator+(m1, m2), which produces the return value MinMax(8, 15). Then MinMax(8, 15) + 5 evaluates next. This becomes a call to operator+(MinMax(8, 15), 5), which produces return value MinMax(5, 15). Then MinMax(5, 15) + 8 evaluates in the same way to produce MinMax(5, 15). Then MinMax(5, 15) + m3 evaluates to produce MinMax(3, 15). And finally, MinMax(3, 15) + 16 evaluates to MinMax(3, 16). This final result is then used to initialize mFinal.

### Normal Function Way

However, if you don’t need private access, you can write your overloaded operators as normal functions. Note that the Cents class contains an access function (getCents()) that allows us to get at m_cents without having to have direct access to private members. Because of this, we can write our overloaded operator+ as a non-friend:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

class Cents
{
private:
  int m_cents{};

public:
  Cents(int cents)
    : m_cents{ cents }
  {}

  int getCents() const { return m_cents; }
};

// note: this function is not a member function nor a friend function!
Cents operator+(const Cents& c1, const Cents& c2)
{
  // use the Cents constructor and operator+(int, int)
  // we don't need direct access to private members here
  return Cents{ c1.getCents() + c2.getCents() };
}

int main()
{
  Cents cents1{ 6 };
  Cents cents2{ 8 };
  Cents centsSum{ cents1 + cents2 };
  std::cout << "I have " << centsSum.getCents() << " cents.\n";

  return 0;
}
```

In general, a normal function should be preferred over a friend function if it’s possible to do so with the existing member functions available (the less functions touching your classes’s internals, the better). However, don’t add additional access functions just to overload an operator as a normal function instead of a friend function!

**Best practice**: Prefer overloading operators as normal functions instead of friends if it’s possible to do so without adding additional functions.
