# 		9. Arrays

An **array** is an aggregate data type that lets us access many variables of the same type through a single identifier.

```cpp
int testScore[30]{}; // allocate 30 integer variables in a fixed array
```

In an array variable declaration, we use square brackets ([]) to tell the compiler both that this is an array variable (instead of a normal variable), as well as how many variables to allocate (called the **array length**).

A **fixed array** (also called a **fixed length array** or **fixed size array**) is an array where the length is known at compile time. When testScore is instantiated, 30 integers will be allocated.

Arrays can be made from any data type.

Each of the variables in an array is called an **element**. Elements do not have their own unique names. Instead, to access individual elements of an array, we use the array name, along with the **subscript operator ([])**, and a parameter called a **subscript** (or **index**) that tells the compiler which element we want. This process is called **subscripting** or **indexing** the array.

Indexing starts at 0. 

Arrays can also be made from structs. Consider the following example:

```cpp
struct Rectangle
{
    int length{};
    int width{};
};
Rectangle rects[5]{}; // declare an array of 5 Rectangles
```

To access a struct member of an array element, first pick which array element you want, and then use the member selection operator to select the struct member you want:

```cpp
rects[0].length = 24;
```

When declaring a fixed array, the length of the array (between the square brackets) must be a compile-time constant. This is because the length of a fixed array must be known at compile time. Here are some different ways to declare fixed arrays:

```cpp
// using a literal constant
int numberOfLessonsPerDay[7]{}; // Ok

// using a constexpr symbolic constant
constexpr int daysPerWeek{ 7 };
int numberOfLessonsPerDay[daysPerWeek]{}; // Ok

// using an enumerator
enum DaysOfWeek
{
    monday,
    tuesday,
    wednesday,
    thursday,
    friday,
    saturday,
    sunday,

    maxDaysOfWeek
};
int numberOfLessonsPerDay[maxDaysOfWeek]{}; // Ok

// using a macro
#define DAYS_PER_WEEK 7
int numberOfLessonsPerDay[DAYS_PER_WEEK]{}; // Works, but don't do this (use a constexpr symbolic constant instead)
```

Because fixed arrays have memory allocated at compile time, that introduces two limitations:

- Fixed arrays cannot have a length based on either user input or some other value calculated at runtime.
- Fixed arrays have a fixed length that can not be changed.

In many cases, these limitations are problematic. Fortunately, C++ supports a second kind of array known as a **dynamic array**. The length of a dynamic array can be set at runtime, and their length can be changed.

**Best practice**: Explicitly initialize your arrays (even when the element type is self-initializing).

One of the big documentation problems with arrays is that integer indices do not provide any information to the programmer about the meaning of the index. Consider a class of 5 students. This can be solved by setting up an enumeration where one enumerator maps to each of the possible array indices:

```cpp
enum StudentNames
{
    kenny, // 0
    kyle, // 1
    stan, // 2
    butters, // 3
    cartman, // 4
    max_students // 5
};

int main()
{
    int testScores[max_students]{}; // allocate 5 integers
    testScores[stan] = 76;

    return 0;
}
```

Note that an extra enumerator named max_students has been added. This enumerator is used during the array declaration to ensure the array has the proper length (as the array length should be one greater than the largest index). This is useful both for documentation purposes, and because the array will automatically be resized if another enumerator is added.

**Rule**: When using arrays, ensure that your indices are valid for the range of your array!

## Length of an array

The std::size() function from the <iterator> header can be used to determine the length of arrays.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator> // for std::size

int main()
{
    int array[]{ 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21 };
    std::cout << "The array has: " << std::size(array) << " elements\n";

    return 0;
}
```

**Note** that due to the way C++ passes arrays to functions, this will *not* work for arrays that have been passed to functions!

**Note** that std::size returns an unsigned value. If you need a signed value, you can either cast the result or, since C++20, use std::ssize() (stands for signed size).

## Sorting

Sorting an array can make searching an array more efficient, not only for humans, but also for computers. 

The downside is, of course, that sorting an array is comparatively expensive, and it often isn’t worth sorting an array in order to make searching fast unless you’re going to be searching it many times.

Sorting is generally performed by repeatedly comparing pairs of array elements, and swapping them if they meet some predefined criteria. The order in which these elements are compared differs depending on which sorting algorithm is used.

Because sorting arrays is so common, the C++ standard library includes a sorting function named `std::sort`. `std::sort` lives in the <algorithm> header, and can be invoked on an array like so:

```cpp
#include <algorithm> // for std::sort
#include <iostream>
#include <iterator> // for std::size

int main()
{
	int array[]{ 30, 50, 20, 10, 40 };

	std::sort(std::begin(array), std::end(array));

	for (int i{ 0 }; i < static_cast<int>(std::size(array)); ++i)
		std::cout << array[i] << ' ';

	std::cout << '\n';

	return 0;
}
```

Swapping pairs:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <utility>

int main()
{
    int x{ 2 };
    int y{ 4 };
    std::cout << "Before swap: x = " << x << ", y = " << y << '\n';
    std::swap(x, y); // swap the values of x and y
    std::cout << "After swap:  x = " << x << ", y = " << y << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

## Multidimensional Arrays

Multidimensional array can be any dimension

2D:

```cpp
int array[3][5]; // a 3-element array of 5-element arrays
```

3D:

```cpp
int array[5][4][3];
```

C++ is a **row-major** ordered language. 

Initialize with nested braces:

```cpp
int array[3][5]
{
  { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }, // row 0
  { 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 }, // row 1
  { 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 } // row 2
};
```

C++ will replace missing initializers with 0. 



## Passing arrays to functions

Although passing an array to a function at first glance looks just like passing a normal variable, underneath the hood, C++ treats arrays differently.

Because copying large arrays can be very expensive, C++ does *not* copy an array when an array is passed into a function. Instead, the *actual* array is passed. This has the side effect of allowing functions to directly change the value of array elements!

If you want to ensure a function does not modify the array elements passed into it, you can make the array const.